What’s up, Drew?
- Hey, what's going on?
- Hey, man.
A-haw haw haw-haw
Heh, a-haw haw haw
Well, I hear it's fine if you got the time
And the ten to get yourself in
When I realized that I would
not be part of the AMS spacewalks,
I definitely was disappointed.
I feel really tied to them.
And the whole team, I feel part of it.
When you have your mind set
on a goal and it doesn’t work out,
it can get you down.
We’re all human
and nobody likes a setback.
Nobody likes disappointment
and I’m no different.
But I’ve been around
this business long enough
to know that you can’t
get married to a launch date.
-You can’t get married to a task.
Yeah.
- Thank you.
No worries.
- Thanks for having us.
- Pleasure. Thanks.
Thanks a lot, guys.
My role now
is to impart the knowledge
I’ve gained from a year
and a half of training
on to Drew and Luca.
Do I wish I was out there with them?
Absolutely.
Spectacular view
at an orbital sunset
of the approaching Soyuz MS-13.
Just a couple of moments from now.
The two vehicles
about two hundred meters from each other.
And you can see thruster firings on
the Soyuz as it prepares to park itself.
I’m expecting contact.
Do you have contact.
Contact confirmed.
Contact confirmed,
capture confirmed. Docking confirmed.
And NASA astronaut Drew Morgan
now aboard
the International Space Station.
You're welcome aboard
I have you loud and clear.
Yeah!
Awesome!
I’m doing
the sleeping bag tour of the ISS.
This was my first flight,
my first time in space.
I felt this overwhelming sense of,
"Wow, I can’t believe
that I’m on the ISS."
"I can’t believe that
they’re allowing me to do this!"
You know, I’ve looked at pictures,
I’ve been to IMAX movies and I’m like,
"Does it really look like that?
Does it really look like that?"
"I mean, these mov... these pictures
been modified or enhanced in some way?"
It really looks like that.
Except that it surrounds you.
I felt like a balloon that just wanted
to keep floating to the ceiling
because I didn’t know
how to control my body.
It takes some getting used to.
Well, it’s a lot of fun. The moment
that I first experienced microgravity,
I felt like I was hanging upside down.
Because you’re so used
to gravity pulling you down all the time.
I had that sensation
for the first couple of days
of just feeling a little bit
disorientated all the time.
I was excited to see
Jessica and Christina who have just
only recently conducted
the first all-female spacewalk.
It was so nice. Drew, Christina, and I,
actually, you know, we are all classmates.
We’d gone through training together.
So, we know each other
like brothers and sisters.
Grab the other two...
The difference
was that, as a veteran,
I was really waiting for the moment
where we got into weightlessness
and see Drew’s face.
That's when I was, kinda,
sneaking a look at his face
to catch the big grin that comes to you
when you realize,
"Wow! This is really happening."
There is this shared moment
of just, pure joy.
Time to change command.
This is a symbol of ISS commander.
It’s for you.
Now, you’re ISS commander.
My congratulations.
Thank you.
Thank you, Aleksey.
I feel confident
that even though, right now,
all of the tasks that we have
in front of us look daunting...
we as a crew, will make it happen.
And four months from now,
we’ll be looking at this day thinking,
"Yes, that confidence that we felt,
"the confidence that we feel,
we deserved it."
And I will do the best that I can
to be at your service
to deserve your confidence.
Thank you very much. Thank you all
for listening to these words.
What happens now?
Congratulations.
I feel this very deep
sense of responsibility
because they said, "Okay, Luca,
you are going to be performing
"all the specialized tasks
and Drew will become your support."
We'll get it done.
Drew and I will get it done.
Wow. All right.
The AMS is
a multibillion-dollar experiment
on the outside of the space station.
The reason we care so much about it
is because the data that we get from this
impressive piece of machinery,
it could shape where we go
with the future of space exploration.
Human physiology is not compatible
with long duration
space flight in open space
because of the cosmic rays.
In order for us to become
an interplanetary species,
we need to understand what’s out there.
Now, AMS is capable
of finding out what’s out there.
In space, you’re exposed
to giant temperature swings.
Any part that’s exposed
to direct sunlight,
it’s about
positive 250 degrees Fahrenheit or so.
And then any part that’s in the shade
is minus 200 degrees.
The problem is, right now,
the AMS cooling system is broken.
We’ll be required to do a series of
spacewalks to repair this cooling system
and get back to full health.
The final batch of tools which
Drew and Luca will need for the repair,
will get to the space station
on an unmanned cargo launch.
There’s a really tight window
between the arrival of the tools
on the space station
and the AMS spacewalks.
If we miss the delivery
of those tools on that cargo ship,
the spacewalks will be delayed,
who knows how long.
For the AMS repairs,
Luca and Drew will be the astronauts
in space actually doing the work.
But Jeremy and I are continuing
to train with the team on the ground.
To make sure everything goes smoothly
on the day of the spacewalk.
And now I get to turn
the podium over to Jeremy Hansen.
Jeremy Hansen is the most
talented astronaut I’ve worked with.
He has not flown in space,
but you’d never know it.
Canada truly appreciates
American space leadership.
We have accomplished
incredible things together.
Being a Canadian astronaut,
there're significant time between flights
for Canadians and so,
you know, I’ve been here ten years.
I’m still a number of years away
from flying in space.
This here is the AMS.
This is a one-to-one scale
mockup made out of wood.
This is, you know, a mockup of the box
that we need to put on the AMS,
this is the cooling pump itself.
And CO2, it uses CO2 as its coolant.
And that’s what these tubes are all about,
is they run this new
air conditioning system
that goes into these radiators.
You see one up there. So,
we have to cut into these cooling tubes.
Right inside here, on our mockup here,
we’ve already done the cutting.
You’ve got these ten tubes.
We’ve had to come up
with ways to pull these tubes out,
and then cut them
with bolt cutters almost.
Then you bend them out like this.
And then we can do the connection,
but from, you know,
far away in a spacesuit
at an angle, it can be easy
to misidentify which tubes we’re cutting
'cause we’re not cutting all the tubes.
So, you gotta get this right.
If we did cut the wrong tube,
the AMS will probably break.
As we prepare
a plan for a spacewalk,
we need to run it in the NBL
as many times as we can.
We try to cover as many scenarios as we
can in terms of locations where you’ll be,
nuts and bolts,
and tools that you’ll have to use.
You’re constantly trying to validate
that the process is right.
So,
we’re back here for AMS again.
As we talked last time, we’ve got all
the fun things for Luca to avoid
as he's flying in.
The big one for that is going
to be these cables up here.
Wanna make sure
we’re not running into those.
This is our last run.
So, everything comes out.
- Anything else?
Okay.
Each time you go
outside on a spacewalk,
you are one event away
from blowing the repair
or not getting done
what you set out to do.
I want
to remind everybody up here.
Please keep your phones,
or electronic devices on off or silent.
Okay, I’ve gotta go to work.
We'll see ya.
So, I can run tests in the NBL
to arm Drew and Luca
with all the skills and knowledge
they need to go do the EVAs.
Flight lead.
Go.
EV1.
EV2.
Go.
Back up.
- Top side.
- Go.
ECS.
Go.
SSRMS.
Station call will be at 8:23.
EV2, copy.
Copy on two.
Jeremy,
I’ll need the comm, if you don't mind.
You have the comm,
I’m heading to the worksite, Chris.
Ritchie, EV1.
Yes, sir.
I’m ready
whenever the divers are done.
Copy that.
All right, ready for cutting stuff.
That sounds good to us.
See if I can cut my gloves.
Not allowed to say that.
-But I didn't really look hard in there.
Suddenly, three flight directors
-in the room just stood up.
What?
What, what, what, what?
So, first we’re still
on number six, right?
We are on number six.
Okay. So, copy, right on number six.
Six is gonna be
directly below the previously cut number.
- Seven, correct?
Yep.
Okay. Sounds good.
Six is cut.
Now, we’re doing the lower tubes.
Number eight.
These are the two most dangerous ones
for getting the wrong one, I think.
That's right.
All right, triple checked.
I’m confident I have the right one.
And we’re confident as well.
Only put in what you want to cut,
which is actually good words here.
Got a stubborn one here.
There we go. Number eight is cut.
All right. After we do three,
Sabo, what's next?
So, before we move on to the next task,
I’ll take one more glove
and HAP check from you both.
All right, I’ll give you
my glove check right now.
No change, no damage.
And good HAP.
Hold on, guys.
Just hold for a minute.
So, the one that I have capped
for number eight is really three.
So, the one that’s actually number three,
still needs to be cut. Oh, we have a...
Or, excuse me,
that’s actually number eight.
Wait a minute.
Yeah, I pulled it out.
- Yeah. Okay.
I gotta be able
to do this right.
So, tube number three which
is supposed to be cut on the nadir side,
has been cut on the zenith side.
I think that’s unrecoverable failure.
That’s bad news, dudes.
This is unrecoverable, right?
That’s just... Those...
That’s it, right?
No... no action required?
Affirm. No action required.
- I got... I don’t know what to say to you.
How was it?
It’s all good, yeah.
I couldn't believe it.
I actually... I was like, "What?"
Sure enough, I cut the wrong tube.
And it was unrecoverable.
If you cut the wrong tube
in the wrong place,
you've effectively lost the ability
to do the repair. So, it's a big deal.
The heart of the fabric of who I am
is someone who doesn't like to disappoint.
It really bothers me
to disappoint those people
that are believing in me
or counting on me.
It’s the same analogy
for when I was in the military.
In times of war, you have
to be completely immersed
in your role with the unit.
Going to funerals of teammates...
really makes you want to just be
as sharp as you can with your job.
We would think about everything,
plan for everything
because your poor decisions
or poor preparation
could impact the mission,
and your teammate’s lives.
That’s true
in the astronaut world as well.
At a certain point it’s time for other
astronauts, for them to have their chance.
You just never want to be that person
that everybody wants to retire.
My team has worked on this project
for four or five years now.
We have built twenty-five plus tools
designed specifically
for the AMS missions.
One of the challenges with this project
is there aren’t handrails
on the outside of AMS
that the crew members can grab onto,
and stabilize themselves.
When you’re turning a wrench,
you don’t want their whole body to turn,
so they need to stabilize
themselves somehow.
So, when we first talked to Chris
at the very beginning of this project,
we said,
"Okay, we think you need handrails."
He said, "If you can get me a handrail
that will install in less than 30 minutes,
"I’ll take it."
I said, "challenge accepted."
And we did it in less than 30 seconds.
And you have a handrail.
I like the handrail a lot.
It makes me happy.
Swages?
Yeah.
Oh, my least favorite tool.
So, swaging, we’ve got
the old system that is currently on orbit
and we need to connect the new system.
So, to do that you have to
connect the old stainless-steel lines
to the new stainless-steel lines.
So, we go in and we cut those lines
and then we’ve gotta connect them.
So, a swage is a way
to crimp onto the old tubes.
So, you crimp on one side on the old tubes
then you bring the new tubes in.
Crimps onto it and creates
a metal-on-metal seal that doesn’t leak.
Fingers crossed.
We’ve been working
with the swage tool for years now
but we haven’t been able
to find the solution.
We always thought that the swaging
was gonna be
the most difficult part of the operation.
It is one of the most frustrating things
I think I’ve ever had to deal with.
This is ARGOS.
It can basically suspend you
as if you’re in microgravity
and we’ve used it a lot for AMS
to improve our techniques
and make sure that they’re going
to work for us in space.
I can’t even get the tube
in the straightener all the way.
Maybe it slipped in there or something?
Yeah...
It’s a lot of pressure.
We're all very stressed.
We weren’t able to get it to work
Chris has done an amazing job.
He’s one of the most capable
astronauts we have.
Some days I feel like
we torture him a bit
because we have him in ARGOS all the time
and we just keep finding
that every time we fix something,
something else runs in.
What iteration are we on? Like if you had
a folder on your computer...
- What does this say?
- We do actually have one.
...like Swage dot 17?
Fix that problem and then
another one crops up,
and we fix that one
and this one crops up.
I can’t reach it right now.
It is the most frustrating thing
I’ve ever had to deal with.
It makes me want to scream.
We have to get this working today.
This time nothing’s going to leak,
we’ve left nothing up to chance.
If the swage doesn't
work this time, we’re out of ideas.
How you doing, Jeremy?
- Great.
- Suit feel okay?
We cannot miss our tool's launch window.
All right, Jeremy you are in microgravity.
Every single piece
has to fall into place.
Okay,
I’m going to go ahead and swage.
Yep.
Go for one.
Go for two.
So far so good.
Go three.
It’s still off. That’s what
I’m telling you is not happening.
It is insanely frustrating.
I’ve done everything you can think of
to get this to do what I need it to do
and something that I can’t name,
is causing it to fail.
Oh, boy, are we running out of time.
How we gonna get this done,
and still have enough runway at the end?
Okay, GCA, I'm gonna GCA,
five degrees, right roll.
My last name is Bollweg,
that sometimes stands for Plan B.
Well. I gotta come up with a Plan B here.
Copy.
Never give up. You just can’t.
Otherwise, the whole mission is not
gonna be successful. Never give up.
If it’s leaking,
I can make it stop leaking.
I’ve been doing it
since I was 11 years old.
This is... You know, I was
brought up as a plumber.
My father was a plumbing, heating,
electrical and drainage contractor.
The business was actually formed by
my grandfather, J.H. Bollweg and Sons
and I started working there
when I was 11 years old.
You know, sweeping the floors,
stocking shelves, you know,
and learned a lot about plumbing.
So, it was that plumbing background
that started in my father’s shop
that led to this.
And now I’m a space plumber.
My entire life
I’ve always had some sorta workshop.
I’m not a whole person
if I don't have a place to work on things.
Alright so the acronym BARF is
the Bollweg Advanced Research Facility.
Well, I did some tests in the
Bollweg low temperature thermal chamber
which of course
is the freezer in the house.
Or I did it in the high temperature
thermal chamber which was our oven.
You know...
So, welcome to the BARF!
Everywhere I’ve ever worked,
I’ve always been pushed into
various management positions
and I’ve hated it. Every time.
I enjoy building things.
That’s my thing. Making things work.
When it became apparent
that this fitting was a problem,
my next trip back here
I brought a bunch of this stuff with me
to make that fitting.
If we do all these spacewalks
and the fitting leaks, what's the point?
It's a passion,
it’s always been like this, I don't know.
I guess a lot like my dad was,
kind of a workaholic.
He worked extra hours as well.
But with seven of us kids
we still all came out okay!
You have to sacrifice a lot
of your personal life to be doing this.
You know,
so it takes a certain personality.
It’s not unusual for me to be at work
all day, come home, we have dinner,
do a couple things, they go
to bed and I go back to work.
You pay for it, it stresses you out,
it ages you.
There's been times
where the sun is coming up...
...and I’m still out here tinkering.
My youngest boy keeps saying
at least once a week,
"You need to retire, you need to retire."
And he might be right,
you know, who knows?
We went to the next stage,
and built our first prototype, in Germany.
Seeing the capability they have there
and having that wonderful machine shop,
I described what I needed and boom!
"Here you go."
Perfect.
So, then we showed the team
the prototype and from that point
we could build a complete set of them.
But you need
to swage 'em and test 'em
to make sure that they’re going
to work okay in the vacuum of space.
Okay?
It wasn't perfectly clear
that these repairs
would be ready to execute this year,
this calendar year.
When they're having serious,
serious problems with the tools,
it doesn't breed a lot of confidence
that you should put
the plan in place to make it happen.
Right.
Late in the game, to completely
change the whole tool process
is a big deal.
Yeah. Tough.
Yaw me around.
All right, I’m ready
for the swage tool, please.
Here we go.
Like butter.
And you see on one, 75 flat.
It's one of them.
And then you close both handles.
To me, that's a game changer
for this. To do it in this way.
- Yeah, I like it!
Good, good.
To have Ken’s swage pass the test
is a huge relief for the whole team.
Now, we can get it
to the cargo ship on time for launch.
Today’s results were great.
We passed leak tests on all eight swages.
It’s exciting news.
Moving in the right direction.
I’m more confident today
than I’ve been in the last four years.
Yeah, me too.
It’s nice to be one step closer.
I think it’s gonna be really good.
The hardware’s ready to go.
You know,
you figure all these things out
and then by the time you get to the end,
hopefully you got a good spacecraft,
a good piece of hardware,
- in this case, a good set of EVAs.
- Yeah, here’s hoping.
It’s gonna be awesome.
Never quite sure how I like my hairnet.
Yeah.
The team is looking
at all these pieces of equipment
before it gets loaded up in the bags
for final loading into the spacecraft.
So, this is the last time
people on earth will see this equipment.
Next time will be on board the station.
We get that line. So, since there is
pressure inside, this will pop open.
So, when you do the leak check,
see how it’s pushed in just a little bit?
That’s what you’re going to see.
That indicates that there is no leak.
If they see any red,
if it’s a small leak it'll look like that.
If it’s a big leak,
it'll look like that then.
So, if you tighten it, come back
in an hour, then you should see that.
Which is nothing. If you see that again,
that’s a really bad day.
Getting the cover off, I think
the next most important critical thing
would be
making the EVA connections for the tubes.
Many times. Both in the NBL and ARGOS.
No. And what concerns us is that the last
time they saw this was on May 31st.
- Yeah.
- Next time they'll see it,
will be on orbit.
So, that’s why
we’re very concerned about this.
It’s done. The what-ifs,
the what if we... All done.
The team is happy, the team is motivated,
and really anxious to see a rocket lift
off the planet with their equipment in it
and knowing that it’s on its way
to the final step which is the repair.
It's a great honor
for me to introduce our next speaker,
Professor Samuel Ting is the creator
and the principal investigator
of the Alpha Magnetic Spectrometer
on the ISS.
The AMS results over
its eight year period in space
have changed
our understanding of the cosmos,
and they continue to do so, to this day.
Professor Ting...
Hey, here we go.
Pretty excited.
The kickoff was four years ago,
this is... now we’re on the goal line.
I’m not in charge
of any of this right now.
Everything else that’s on it, I’ve been
in charge of for the last four years,
so of course, I’m very worried about that.
I want to see this thing get off.
This has been
a real constant in my life.
AMS started in ‘94,
so I was eight years old.
So, really the project is like my...
little brother in space.
Five minutes.
- Five?
- Yep.
My worst nightmare is to see
the thing somehow fail on the pad,
destroy the hardware and,
"Oh, my gosh, we gotta go do this again?"
Sam, I'm not sure if we actually got all
the hardware on there...
- Did you double check everything?
- Yeah, I’ll be back in a minute...
T-minus 30 seconds.
Good to go.
Let’s just get this off.
T-minus ten.
Five, four, three, two, one.
One!
Come on, baby...
Here it is, there it is. Here we go!
- Look at it! Look!
- Go, baby, go. Go.
We’re on our way.
Wow.
Now, we can go to work.
It's a great achievement.
- I know!
Everything you did.
- Thank you!
- Nope! We’ve got more to do,
- now we’ve got a couple spacewalks to do.
- Yes, yes. Yes, yes, that's right.
Fire it up.
The science it’s doing,
the research we’re doing,
the ways we can learn
to go to Mars, to go to the Moon,
to go to other galaxies eventually.
This is the foundation of it.